---
title: Generative Adversarial Networks
categories:
- Computer Vision
feature_text: |
  Generative Adversarial Networks
feature_image:
   "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
excerpt: ""

---
<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-chtml.js"></script>
<body>

<div>
	<h3>Introduction</h3>
	<p>
		There are two kinds of models in machine learning - Generative models and Discriminative models. Discriminative model models the decision boundary between the classes where as Generative model models the distribution of classes. Example of discriminative models include logistic regression, SVM, CNNs and so on. Example of generative models include Naive bayes, bayesian networks, HMMs etc.
	</p>
	<h3>Why Generative Models?</h3>
	<p> 
		Training and sampling from generative models can be the test of the ability to represent and manipulate high dimensional training data distribution. Generative models can be trained with missing data and can provide predictions on inputs that are missing data. Learning algorithm can be generalized by looking at the large number of unlabelled samples. GANs are able to perform semi supervised learning reasonably well. Generative models can impute more information into the image than that was originally present in the input. 
	</p>
	<h3>Generative Models</h3>
	<p>
		Training a discriminative model involves learning a mapping from input space to labels. Generative models learn a model of joint probability distribution p(x, y) of inputs x and label y. Generative models use bayes rule to classify an image by computing p(y|x) and taking most likely label. Generative models can be classified into two types depending on type of learning - implicity density  and Explicit density. 
	</p>
	<p>
		If we denote the training data distribution as \( P_{data}(x) \) and distribution represented by model as \( P_{model}(x) \). Explicit density models define and solve for \( P_{model}(x) \). Implicit models can be trained without the need to explicitly define a density function. Implicit density models interact indirectly  with \( P_{model}(x) \) by sampling from the distribution.	 Variational Auto Encoder (VAE), Fully Visible Belief Networks (FVBN), Boltzmann Machines are few examples of explicit density based models. Generative Stochastic Network (GSN) and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) are few examples of implicity density based models. 
	</p>
	<h3>Generative Adversarial Networks</h3>
	<p>
		Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) belong to a implicit density class of generative models.  GAN addresses implcit density problem by process of sampling from complex training distributions. GANs are known to produce better samples than other generative methods. GAN have shown great results in generating realistic images, human language and music.
	</p>
<!-- 	<p>
		Since the training distributions are complex we can sample random noise and learn the transformation from this noise to training distribution (Generator). We have no idea on what the noise z corresponds to in the training set. (sample corresponding to z may or may not be in the training set). Solution is to have a neural network (discriminator) that predicts whether image is in training set or not. 
	</p> -->
 	<p>
 		Basic idea of GAN is set up a two player game between two players - Generator and discriminator. Generator creates samples that are intended to come from the same distribution as the training data. The goal of discriminator is classify inputs from training set as real or generated images from generator as fake.  Inputs to discriminator consists of real samples with their class id as 1 and generated images with their class id as 0 (fake). This way discriminator learns to classify images by formulating task as a binary classification problem. 
	</p>
	<p>
	   Genrative models do not sample directly from the training distribution (highly complex) rather they sample from simple distribution and learn the transformation to training distribution. Generator in GAN takes random noise from some prior distribution z as input and yields G(Z) - sample from \( P_{model}(x) \). If both the networks have sufficient capacity then nash equilibrium is achieved. Nash equilibrium for GAN will be as follows - Generator generates image for which discriminator no longer able to classify the image as real or fake (D(x) = 0.5). 
	</p>
	<h3>Loss functions</h3>
	<p>
		We have defined two distributions - \( P_{data}(x) \) as the training data distribution and \( P_{model}(x) \) as the distribution represented by the model. To observe how well model \( P_{model}(x) \) has  represented by the training data distribution \( P_{data}(x) \) - we need to find the divergence between two distributions. There are multiple ways to do this. One class of divergence (F- divergence ) measures using likelihood ratio \(\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} \) and other class of divergence (Integral Probability Metrics ) measures distance as \( P(x) - Q(x) \). 
	</p>
	<p>
		Example of IPM class of GAN is Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) and F-Divergence class of GAN is Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network(DCGAN). F-Divergence class of metrics popularly include - KL Divergence and JS Divergence and IPM class of divergence includes Wasserstein and Maximum Mean Discrepency.
	</p>
		<h4>KL Divergence</h4>
		<p>
			KL Divergence measure how one probability distribution P diverges form a second probability distribution Q. KL Divergence would be zero when p and q are same (p(x) == q(x)). In cases where p(x) is 0 and q(x) is significantly non zero effect is discarded.  So KL divergence is not symmetric and cannot be used as similarity measure between two distributions. \[ D_{KL}(p\|q) = \int_{x}{} p(x) log (\frac{p(x)}{q(x)}) dx\]
		</p>
		<h4>JS Divergence</h4>
		<p>
			Jenson - Shannon Divergence (JS Divergence) can be used as a similarity measure between two probability distributions. JS Divergence is symmetric and more smooth. JS Divergence is defined as \[ D_{JS}(p\|q) = \frac{1}{2}  D_{KL}(p\| \frac{p+q}{2}) + \frac{1}{2}  D_{KL}(q\| \frac{p+q}{2})\] 
		</p>
		<h4>Earth Mover's Distance (EMD) </h4>
		<p>
			Wasserstein distance or Earthmover distance is the measure of distance between two probability distributions. Intuitively one distribution can be seen as a collection of holes and other as a mass of earth spread in space then EMD measures least amount of work needed to fill the holes with earth. EMD extends the notion of distance between elements to distance between sets or distributions. 
		</p>
		<h4>Maximum Mean Discrepency</h4>
		<p>
			Maximum Mean Discrepency (MMD) represents distance between probability distributions as the distance between mean embeddings of features. Let us assume we have two distributions P and Q and the mean embedding of P and Q are \(\mu_p \) and \( \mu_q\) in a reproducing hilbert space F respectively. MMD is defined as \[ MMD(F, P, Q) = \| \mu_p - \mu_q \|_F \]
		</p>
	<h3>Training GAN</h3>
	<p>
		There are two components  or networks that needs to be optimized - Generator and discriminator. Generator and discriminator play minimax game - Generator learns to make the D(G(Z)) as 1 while discriminator learns to make D(x) close to 1 and D(G(Z)) close to 0. We perform gradient descent by oscillating between both the networks. Loss function for minimax game is defined as follows
		\[\min\limits_G\max\limits_D L(D, G) = E_{x \sim p_{data}(x)} [log D(x)] + E_{x \sim p_{model}(z)} [1 - log(D(G(z)))]\] where \( p_{model}(x)\) represents generators distribution and \( p_{data}(x)\) represents the training data distribution. 
	</p>
	<p>
		In the above formulation, if we observe carefully GAN plays a zero sum game in which if one player wins then the other loses. In zero sum game,  loss function of one can be negative of other. Zero sum games are also known as minimax games since their solution involves both maximization and minimization. There are results that show that this type of learning based on zero sum game is similar to minimize JS divergence between the data and the model distribution. For more details read <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00160.pdf">this.</a>
	</p>
	<p>
		In minimax game - discriminator minmizes cross entropy and generator maximizes the same cross entropy. Minimizing cross entropy for discriminator is highly effective because loss function doesnt saturate when model predicts incorrect output. Cross entropy value eventually gets to 0 when model predicts correct output. When the discriminator rejects samples with high confidence then gradient of generator vanishes. We can make use of cross entropy by flipping the target instead of flipping discriminator cost. 
	</p>
	<p>
		In the traditional minimax game generator minimizes the log probability of discriminator being correct and in modified minimax generator maximizes the log probability of discriminator being mistaken. The idea of this is to have stronger gradient when 	either of the player is losing the game. This modified minimax is not zero sum game and cannot be described with a single value function. In the modified minimax game generator maximizes log(D(Z)). 
	</p>
	<h3>Problems in Training GANS</h3>
		<ol>
			<li>Training process is slow and unstable</li>
			<li>Both generator and discriminator updates weights independently with no respect to other player. Updating the gradient of both the models many not lead to convergence. We may not achieve a nash equilibrium in non cooperative game.</li>
			<li>GAN dilemma - If discriminator behaves badly then there would not be any feedback to generator. If discriminator performs ideally then the gradient of loss function would be close to 0 and learning becomes slow or may be collapsed.</li>
			<li>Mode Collapse - During training, generator may collapse to a setting where it produces same outputs. Even though it could fool the discriminator it restricts to a small subspace with a low variety.</li>
			<li>There are no good evaluation metrics that tells us about the training progress. We have a no clue about training when to stop it. </li>
		</ol>
	<h3>References</h3>
		<ol>
			<li><a href="http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2020/lecture_11.pdf">Generative Models</a></li>
			<li><a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00160.pdf">Generative Adversarial Networks - NIPS 2016</a></li>
			<li><a href="https://dudeperf3ct.github.io/gan/2019/04/13/Power-of-GAN/#gan-framework">Power of GAN</a></li>
			<li><a href="https://lilianweng.github.io/lil-log/2017/08/20/from-GAN-to-WGAN.html">From GAN to WGAN</a></li>
			<li><a href="http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/CVonline/LOCAL_COPIES/RUBNER/emd.html">The Earth Mover's Distance</a></li>
			<li><a href="https://docs.seldon.io/projects/alibi-detect/en/stable/methods/mmddrift.html">Maximum Mean Discrepency</a></li>
		</ol>
</div>
</body>
